We are experiencing some temporary issues. The market data on this page are currently delayed. Please bear with us as we address this and restore your personalized lists.
Triple Moving Average Crossover
Subscribe to Yahoo Finance Plus to view Fair Value for M
The battle between Kohl's and it's activist investor is heating up ahead of the company's annual meeting in May.
Macy's (M) closed at $24.24 in the latest trading session, marking a -0.49% move from the prior day.
Rowan County has emerged as one of the hottest industrial submarkets in the region in recent years. Winning the Macy's project could take it to the next level.
Macy's (M) boosts its supply-chain operations. It plans to open a fulfillment center in China Grove, NC, to meet buoyant omni-channel demand.
Five years in the making, the vision to transform a Macy’s in Boulder into office space has become even more real with the $32 million purchase of the building last week.  Corum Real Estate Group and Fair Street Partners, who together make up Boulder 29 LLC, purchased the 150,000-square-foot department store in Boulder’s Twenty Ninth Street Shopping Center from Macy’s Retail Holdings LLC and Macy’s California, Inc. in a deal recorded on March 23, according to property records.  “It’s almost too good to be true,” said Eric Komppa, president of Corum Real Estate Group.
When fully operational, the center will account for nearly 30 percent of Macy’s Inc.'s digital supply chain capacity, serve customers nationwide, and employ nearly 2,800 workers.
Yahoo Finance Live's Rachelle Akuffo examines Macy's stock amid news of fulfillment center plans.
In the first three months of the year, 13 companies have pledged to create 11,314 jobs in North Carolina in exchange for state incentives
Macy's Inc. said Thursday that it will open a fulfillment center in China Grove, N.C. in 2024 that will employ 2,800 workers. The facility, which will span 1.4 million square feet and cost $584 million, will account for 30% of the department store retailer's digital supply chain capacity. Macy's is also expanding its Texas facility, with the new distribution center expected to be complete mid-2023. Macy's stock was down 3.5% on Thursday, but has rallied more than 52% over the past year.
NFL phenom Patrick Mahomes is ready to go for the league's overtime rules.
Kohl's Corporation
Nordstrom, Inc.
Target Corporation
The Gap, Inc.
Bed Bath & Beyond Inc.
Nordstrom, Inc.
Kohl's Corporation
Dillard's, Inc.
Sears Holdings Corporation
Companhia Brasileira de Distribuição
StrongBuy
Buy
Hold
Under-perform
Sell
151 West 34th StreetNew York, NY 10001United States212 494 1621https://www.macysinc.com
Sector(s): Consumer CyclicalIndustry: Department StoresFull Time Employees: 88,857
Macy's, Inc., an omni-channel retail organization, operates stores, Websites, and mobile applications. The company sells a range of merchandise, such as apparel and accessories for men, women, and children; cosmetics; home furnishings; and other consumer goods. As of January 29, 2022, it operated 725 department stores in the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, and Guam under the Macy's, Macy's Backstage, Market by Macy's, Bloomingdale's, Bloomingdale's The Outlet, Bloomies, and bluemercury brands. It also operates in Dubai, the United Arab Emirates, and Al Zahra, Kuwait under the license agreements. The company also operates as a beauty products and spa retailer. The company was formerly known as Federated Department Stores, Inc. and changed its name to Macy's, Inc. in June 2007. Macy's, Inc. was founded in 1830 and is based in New York, New York.
More about Macy's Inc.


M, or m, is the thirteenth letter of the modern English alphabet and the ISO basic Latin alphabet. Its name in English is em (pronounced /ˈɛm/), plural ems.[1]

The letter M is derived from the Phoenician Mem, via the Greek Mu (Μ, μ). Semitic Mem is most likely derived from a "Proto-Sinaitic"  (Bronze Age) adoption of the  "water" ideogram in Egyptian writing. The Egyptian sign had the acrophonic value /n/, from the Egyptian word for "water", nt; the adoption as the Semitic letter for /m/ was presumably also on acrophonic grounds, from the Semitic word for "water", *mā(y)-.[2]

The letter ⟨m⟩ represents the bilabial nasal consonant sound [m] in the orthography of Latin as well as in that of many modern languages, and also in the International Phonetic Alphabet. In English, the Oxford English Dictionary (first edition) says that ⟨m⟩ is sometimes a vowel, in words like spasm and in the suffix -ism. In modern terminology, this is described as a syllabic consonant (IPA [m̩]).

In Washo, lower-case ⟨m⟩ represents a typical em sound, while upper-case ⟨M⟩ represents a voiceless em sound.





