Meanings
Games
Learn
Writing
Word of the Day
Meanings
Games
Learn
Writing
Word of the Day
In this game, one person is going to share the definition of a word they chose. Then, another person has to guess what word it is. You should guess along at home! Don’t worry: we’ll have clues!
I can’t recall ever seeing an adjusted EBITDA definition with 12 different categories of exclusion.
“Part of the promise of this technology is that a fan of any show, by definition, usually wants to know more about it, more about the characters,” Moore said.
With every definition of home in shambles, it would be a wonder the homeless still feel so lost if it weren’t for the humanity at stake.
John Chaney, eternally fiery and relentlessly competitive, was the definition of toughnessThose holiday phone calls never lasted less than an hour.
There is no formal definition of an uncivil war, but America is increasingly split between members of two political parties that hate each other.
Nor does the jet have the ability to capture high-definition video, utilize an infra-red pointer.
Those who are by definition free of the biases that come with living near or working with those entrusted to protect us.
Editor's Note: This article has been revised to include the definition and text of Section 12.
Back in 2001, that “definition” of female beauty basically fell into two categories: Playboy chic, or heroin chic.
Under that definition, forced kissing can certainly constitute as a form of sexual assault.
Since we are to learn by thinking we must at the outset learn the definition of the three Laws of Thinking.
In a party of wits an argument took place as to the definition of a reasonable animal.
After much thinking I have arrived at a definition of Swadeshi that, perhaps, best illustrates my meaning.
Thus, as for religion, in order to satisfy the requirements of the definition, I must restrict myself to my ancestral religion.
They would probably have little effect on the definition, and at any rate could not be expected to improve it.
What Do “a.m.” And “p.m.” Stand For?
What Is An Em Dash And How Do You Use It?
“Have” vs. “Has”: When To Use Each One
Why Do “Left” And “Right” Mean Liberal And Conservative?
From “Generation A” To “Zeitgeisty”: Over 200 New Words And Definitions Added To Dictionary.com
What Is A Pronoun? Types And Examples
WORD OF THE DAY
The Most Surprisingly Serendipitous Words Of The Day
What Can (And Cannot) Be Used In A Baby Name?
Show Your Appreciation With 25 Other Ways To Say “Thank You”
“Epidemic” vs. “Pandemic” vs. “Endemic”: What Do These Terms Mean?
