Find centralized, trusted content and collaborate around the technologies you use most.
Teams
Q&A for work
Connect and share knowledge within a single location that is structured and easy to search.
In a text about Excel I have read the following:
when defining a name for a cell and this was entered into the Refers To field.
What does this mean?
When entered as the reference of a Named range, it refers to range on the sheet the named range is used on.
For example, create a named range MyName refering to =SUM(!B1:!K1) 
Place a formula on Sheet1 =MyName. This will sum Sheet1!B1:K1 
Now place the same formula (=MyName) on Sheet2.  That formula will sum Sheet2!B1:K1
Note: (as pnuts commented) this and the regular SheetName!B1:K1 format are relative, so reference different cells as the =MyName formula is entered into different cells.
If you use that forumla in the name manager you are creating a dynamic range which uses "this sheet" in place of a specific sheet.
As Jerry says, Sheet1!A1 refers to cell A1 on Sheet1. If you create a named range and omit the Sheet1 part you will reference cell A1 on the currently active sheet. (omitting the sheet reference and using it in a cell formula will error).
edit: my bad, I was using $A$1 which will lock it to the A1 cell as above, thanks pnuts :p
Thanks for contributing an answer to Stack Overflow!
But avoid …
To learn more, see our tips on writing great answers.
Required, but never shown
Required, but never shown

                                                By clicking “Post Your Answer”, you agree to our terms of service, privacy policy and cookie policy

To subscribe to this RSS feed, copy and paste this URL into your RSS reader.

Site design / logo © 2022 Stack Exchange Inc; user contributions licensed under cc by-sa.                    rev 2022.4.5.41860


                        Your privacy
                    

                        By clicking “Accept all cookies”, you agree Stack Exchange can store cookies on your device and disclose information in accordance with our Cookie Policy.
                    
0
Wiki User
It is the character that tells Excel you are referencing
anotherl worksheet. To refer to Sheet2 while in Sheet1 you put the
sheetname followed by the exclamation mark followed by the cell in
the worksheet, like this:
=Sheet2!A3
Wiki User
everything is the purpose of Formula !
A reference point helps to explain why we are, where we are.
It is used to help identify a cell on a particular sheet. It is
put after the name of the sheet and before the cell reference. The
following refers to cell F4 on Sheet2 for example:
=Sheet2!F4
Please indicate what you mean by a reference solution.
A reference point helps to explain why we are, where we are.
An exclamation mark (!) is used in a sentence to give the
impression of shouting. E.g. "You there get here now!" you might
have noticed that you will have read that in a shouting tone.
A question mark distinguishes a sentence from a statement, a command, or an exclamation.
explore audience and purpose
explore audience and purpose
explore audience and purpose
What is the purpose of a contract?
A basketball reference serves the purpose of comparing
basketball statistics. It is useful as a database that can be used
for looking up a variety of statistics.
Something went wrong. Wait a moment and try again.
Something went wrong. Wait a moment and try again.
