
        Focus on what matters instead of fighting with Git. Whether you're new to Git or a seasoned user, GitHub Desktop simplifies your development workflow.
      

        Try new features in the  Beta Channel before they're released.
      

          Download for an Apple Silicon Mac. See the Apple
            docs about Apple vs Intel chips.
        

          Download for Windows (MSI)


          Download for Windows


          Download for macOS


  By downloading, you agree to the Open Source Applications Terms.


        Quickly add co-authors to your commit. Great for pairing and excellent for
        sending a little love/credit to that special someone who helped fix that
        gnarly bug of yours. See the attribution on the history page, undo an
        accidental attribution, and
        
          see the co-authors on github.com
        


        See all open pull requests for your repositories and check them out as if they were a local branch, even if
        they're from upstream branches or forks.
        See which pull requests pass commit status checks, too!
      

        The new GitHub Desktop supports syntax highlighting when viewing diffs for a variety of different languages.
      

          Easily compare changed images. See the before and after, swipe or fade between the two,
          or look at just the changed parts.
        

          Open your favorite editor or shell from the app, or jump back to GitHub Desktop from your shell.
          GitHub Desktop is your springboard for work.
        

          GitHub Desktop is open source now!
          Check out our roadmap, contribute, and help us make collaboration even easier.
        

Terms
Privacy Policy
EULA
Release Notes

© 2022 GitHub, Inc. All rights reserved.
Millions of developers and companies build, ship, and maintain their software on GitHub—the largest and most advanced development platform in the world.
Developers
Organizations
Repositories
Fortune 100
Take collaboration to the next level with security and administrative features built for teams.
* GitHub CLI is available on macOS, Windows, and Linux* GitHub Desktop is available on macOS and Windows
Small experiments, inspired inventions, and the software everyone depends on—the code you write on GitHub can reach one codebase or millions.
tensorflow/tensorflow
An Open Source Machine Learning Framework for Everyone
gatsbyjs/gatsby
Build blazing fast, modern apps and websites with React
home-assistant/core
🏡 Open source home automation that puts local control and privacy first
rust-lang/rust
Empowering everyone to build reliable and efficient software.
flutter/flutter
Flutter makes it easy and fast to build beautiful apps for mobile and beyond.
kubernetes/kubernetes
Production-Grade Container Scheduling and Management
apple/swift
The Swift Programming Language
ansible/ansible
Ansible is a radically simple IT automation platform.
hashicorp/terraform
Terraform enables you to safely and predictably create, change, and improve infrastructure. 
ohmyzsh/ohmyzsh
🙃 A delightful community-driven framework for managing your zsh configuration.
facebook/react
A declarative, efficient, and flexible JavaScript library for building user interfaces.
npm/cli
The package manager for JavaScript
