 (Entry 1 of 2)
symbol
Definition of symbol (Entry 2 of 2)
Synonyms: Noun

                                These example sentences are selected automatically from various online news sources to reflect current usage of the word 'symbol.' Views expressed in the examples do not represent the opinion of Merriam-Webster or its editors. Send us feedback.
                            
peace symbol
sex symbol
status symbol
yinyang symbol
peace symbol
sex symbol
status symbol
yinyang symbol
Noun
15th century, in the meaning defined at sense 1
Verb
1832, in the meaning defined above
Noun

                in sense 1, from Late Latin symbolum, from Late Greek symbolon, from Greek, token, sign; in other senses from Latin symbolum token, sign, symbol, from Greek symbolon, literally, token of identity verified by comparing its other half, from symballein to throw together, compare, from syn- + ballein to throw  — more at devil 
Share symbol
Time Traveler for symbol
See more words from the same century
From the Editors at Merriam-Webster
The Land of Multisyllabic Homophones
A step up from 'there,' 'their,' and 'they're'
The Origin of "Nerd" & More
Most Popular Tweets About Words, Vol. 1

symbiotism


symbol


symbolgram

Last Updated
31 Mar 2022

Cite this Entry
“Symbol.” Merriam-Webster.com Dictionary, Merriam-Webster, https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/symbol. Accessed 5 Apr. 2022.
More Definitions for symbol
symbol

symbol

Other Words from symbol
More from Merriam-Webster on symbol
Nglish: Translation of symbol for Spanish Speakers
Britannica English: Translation of symbol for Arabic Speakers
Britannica.com: Encyclopedia article about symbol

See Definitions and Examples »
  
Get Word of the Day daily email!
Eponyms: Words Named After People
Can you spell these 10 commonly misspelled words?
A daily challenge for crossword fanatics.
Subscribe to America's largest dictionary and get thousands more definitions and advanced search—ad free!
It's not citrus.
All your favorite pet peeves
Let's nip these in the bud
Words as delightful as they are rare
An old-fashioned rule we can no longer put up with.
A simple way to keep them apart. (Most of the time.)
'Mischievous,' 'nuclear,' and other words to pron...
English was never the same after the Norman Conquest
For each set of words, can you tell which one is ...
Take the quiz
Can you tell your macaroons from your macarons?
Take the quiz
10 quick questions: hear them, spell them
Take the quiz
Learn a new word every day. Delivered to your inbox!
OTHER MERRIAM-WEBSTER DICTIONARIES
FOLLOW US
© 2022 Merriam-Webster, Incorporated
