Web technology reference for developers
Structure of content on the web
Code used to describe document style
General-purpose scripting language
Protocol for transmitting web resources
Interfaces for building web applications
Web technology reference for developers
Learn web development
Learn web development
Learn to structure web content with HTML
Learn to style content using CSS
Learn to run scripts in the browser
Learn to make the web accessible to all
More MDN. Your MDN.
Frequently asked questions about MDN Plus
This chapter documents all the JavaScript language operators, expressions and keywords.
For an alphabetical listing see the sidebar on the left.
Basic keywords and general expressions in JavaScript.
The this keyword refers to a special property of an execution context.
The function keyword defines a function expression.
The class keyword defines a class expression.
The function* keyword defines a generator function expression.
Pause and resume a generator function.
Delegate to another generator function or iterable object.
The async function defines an async function expression.
Pause and resume an async function and wait for the promise's resolution/rejection.
Array initializer/literal syntax.
Object initializer/literal syntax.
Regular expression literal syntax.
Grouping operator.
Left values are the destination of an assignment.

      Member operators provide access to a property or method of an object
      (object.property and object["property"]).
    
The new operator creates an instance of a constructor.
In constructors, new.target refers to the constructor that was invoked by new.
An object exposing context-specific metadata to a JavaScript module.
The super keyword calls the parent constructor.
Spread syntax allows an expression to be expanded in places where multiple arguments (for function calls) or multiple elements (for array literals) are expected.
Postfix/prefix increment and postfix/prefix decrement operators.
Postfix increment operator.
Postfix decrement operator.
Prefix increment operator.
Prefix decrement operator.
A unary operation is an operation with only one operand.
The delete operator deletes a property from an object.
The void operator discards an expression's return value.
The typeof operator determines the type of a given object.
The unary plus operator converts its operand to Number type.
The unary negation operator converts its operand to Number type and then negates it.
Bitwise NOT operator.
Logical NOT operator.
Arithmetic operators take numerical values (either literals or variables) as their operands and return a single numerical value.
Addition operator.
Subtraction operator.
Division operator.
Multiplication operator.
Remainder operator.
Exponentiation operator.
A comparison operator compares its operands and returns a boolean value based on whether the comparison is true.
The in operator determines whether an object has a given property.
The instanceof operator determines whether an object is an instance of another object.
Less than operator.
Greater than operator.
Less than or equal operator.
Greater than or equal operator.
Note: => is not an operator, but the notation for Arrow functions.
The result of evaluating an equality operator is always of type boolean based on whether the comparison is true.
Equality operator.
Inequality operator.
Strict equality operator.
Strict inequality operator.
Operations to shift all bits of the operand.
Bitwise left shift operator.
Bitwise right shift operator.
Bitwise unsigned right shift operator.
Bitwise operators treat their operands as a set of 32 bits (zeros and ones) and return standard JavaScript numerical values.
Bitwise AND.
Bitwise OR.
Bitwise XOR.
Logical operators are typically used with boolean (logical) values, and when they are, they return a boolean value.
Logical AND.
Logical OR.
Nullish Coalescing Operator.
The conditional operator returns one of two values based on the logical value of the condition.
The optional chaining operator returns undefined instead of causing an error if a reference is nullish (null or undefined).
An assignment operator assigns a value to its left operand based on the value of its right operand.
Assignment operator.
Multiplication assignment.
Exponentiation assignment.
Division assignment.
Remainder assignment.
Addition assignment.
Subtraction assignment
Left shift assignment.
Right shift assignment.
Unsigned right shift assignment.
Bitwise AND assignment.
Bitwise XOR assignment.
Bitwise OR assignment.
Logical AND assignment.
Logical OR assignment.
Logical nullish assignment.
Destructuring assignment allows you to assign the properties of an array or object to variables using syntax that looks similar to array or object literals.
The comma operator allows multiple expressions to be evaluated in a single statement and returns the result of the last expression.
No specification data found for javascript.operators.Check for problems with this page or contribute a missing spec_url to mdn/browser-compat-data. Also make sure the specification is included in w3c/browser-specs.
BCD tables only load in the browser
Last modified: Feb 18, 2022, by MDN contributors
Your blueprint for a better internet.
Visit Mozilla Corporation’s not-for-profit parent, the Mozilla Foundation.Portions of this content are ©1998–2022 by individual mozilla.org contributors. Content available under a Creative Commons license.
