Schedule an appointment to meet with the new Center for Global and Career Services about your area of interest.
Join us for Accepted Student Day on Saturday, April 2!
Student-run clubs, organizations, and events are a key part of succeeding at Curry.


		Get Involved!
	

A Division III experience unlike any other. See what it means to be a Curry Colonel.


		Video: Curry Athletics
	

Empower our students to achieve their ambitions. Consider a gift to Curry College today.


		Give Today
	

Our rich liberal arts tradition, sound career focus, and empowering and supportive environment prepare our students for success.


		Academic Excellence
	

Celebrate Curry College's 2nd annual Day of Giving with us on April 6th. Make a gift to The Curry Fund and show that #CurryCounts to YOU!
Learn
Live
#BleedPurple
Thrive
What's your dream? Whether you have it all figured out or are looking for a school that helps you explore different career paths, you can dream bigger at Curry.
Curry College is what students and parents picture college to be: the rolling hills, the friendly faces, and the unmatched opportunities that come along with it.
Your Curry experience doesn’t end at graduation. You’ll continue to reap the various benefits and resources available to our alumni community.
617-333-0500
©2022 Curry CollegeNOTICE OF NON-DISCRIMINATION: Curry College is committed to providing equal opportunity in employment and education to all employees, students, and applicants. No employee, student or applicant shall be discriminated against or harassed on the basis of race, religion, color, sex, age, ethnic or national origin or ancestry, veteran status, physical or mental disability, pregnancy, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, genetic information, veteran or military status, membership in Uniformed Services, or any category protected by applicable state and federal laws. Curry College does not discriminate on the basis of any protected class in administration of its educational policies, admissions policies, scholarship and loan program, and athletic and other school-administered programs. Similarly, Curry College is committed to making its programs and campus accessible to its visitors and compliant with all applicable non-discrimination laws. See Commitment to Non-Discrimination.
